From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Mavaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
From the outside, the political movement
created by Donald Trump has never seemed
more empowered or invulnerable than it
does right now. Except to the man who
helped get Trump elected in the first
place, Steve Bannon, who sees threats to
the movement and betrayals of it at
almost every turn, whether it's bombing
Iran or allowing tech billionaires to
advise the president.
Today, my colleague Jeremy Peters talks
to Bannon about the nature of those
threats and why in Bannon's mind, the
future of the MAGA movement depends on
defeating them.
It's Tuesday, July 1st.
[Music]
Jeremy W. Peters. Michael, you don't
know my middle initial, do you? Uh, it
starts with a C. Yeah, that's right.
Christopher. Yes. Wow. I was mistaken. I
mean, we've known each other for more
like 20 years. So, we have
So, Jeremy, you are a student of the
American political right, the
conservative movement, the rise of
Donald Trump within it. You have
reported on that world for years. You
even wrote a book about it a few years
back. Can you describe what has been
happening within that world over the
past couple of weeks?
Really, it's been kind of a civil war
over the prospect of an actual war in
the Middle East. It begins with Israel's
bombing of Iran a couple of weeks ago.
There's two ways to stop Iran from
having a nuclear weapon. One is
diplomacy, the other is force.
And this leads to calls from the Israeli
right and from many Americans on our
political right over here for the United
States to get more actively involved.
This is why we elected Trump. Sometimes
you got to make hard decisions. We're
warheads
and they're going to hit us with them.
If this is not a reason to defend
ourselves, then give me one.
So immediately you start to see push
back from President Trump's MAGA base.
So you've come out for regime change in
Iran as Tucker Carlson, the former Fox
News host, invites one of the Republican
party's biggest hawks and pro-Israel
politicians Ted Cruz on his show. Okay,
so you topple the regime and by whatever
means. What happens then? How many
people live in Iran, by the way? I I
don't know the population at all. No, I
don't know the population. You don't
know the population of the country you
seek to topple
where he basically belittles and mocks
Ted Cruz in front of his audience. No,
he's not even you don't know anything
about Iran. So, I am not the the Tucker
Carlson bird on Iran. You're a senator
who's calling the government. You're the
one who knows anything about the
country. And of course, as we know,
Trump decides to bomb Iran anyway. Ma is
not for foreign wars. We are not for
regime change. But then you have folks
like Marjorie Taylor Green. Here we are
turning back on the campaign promises
and we bombed Iran on behalf of Israel.
The congresswoman from Georgia who is
really I think at the vanguard of what
the very hardcore Trump loyalist thinks.
There are a lot of MAGA that are not
happy about this. I'll just be blunt. We
can tell this in the chats right now.
There there are a lot of and one of the
most important voices in Republican
politics giving voice to this
non-interventionist sentiment. This is
incrementalism. If they hit back at
American troops or do we go back in and
hit again? Next thing you know, brother,
you're in a forever war. Is Steve
Bannon,
[Music]
right? Steve Bannon, who helped propel
Trump into office in 2016. He was
Trump's campaign chief, famously fell
out of Trump's good graces during that
first term in the White House, but
remained fiercely loyal, supported
Trump's false claim that the 2020
election was stolen, and in fact serves
time in prison because he won't comply
with a congressional subpoena to talk
about the January 6th riots. And Jeremy
Bannon is someone you've covered really
closely. Why in your mind is he such an
important voice in this particular
debate? Right. Well, I've known Bannon
for about 15 years at this point. And
Bannon is important in this particular
political moment because he is the host
of a very influential podcast. It's
called War Room. We know that many
staffers in the West Wing listen to it.
Before Trump was elected the second
time, Bannon would have people on it who
went on to become members of the Trump
cabinet. But it's not just those mega
elites who make up kind of a core
following here. It's the average voter.
It's a it's a very large audience. So it
really does reflect the sentiments of
where Trump's hardcore most loyal
supporters are. Mhm. And Bannon is quite
candid when he sees the White House or
Republicans in Congress straying from
the MAGA principles, from what they
promised voters. He calls balls and
strikes as he sees them. So when the
debate about military intervention in
Iran erupted, hi, how are you? I went to
go visit Steve at his house and home
studio in DC with my colleagues from the
Daily. Welcome. Glad you guys are here.
Hello. And I wanted to find out just how
deep he thought the fissures in MAGA
World were. If he thought that the fight
that was breaking out Republican on
Republican over military action could
really threaten Trump's political
coalition. You know, when I was in the
New York Times when we first did this,
how many years ago? That was uh 2017. It
was a long time ago. Yeah. That was when
um remember somebody yelled, "Fuck you,
Ben." outside at the door. It's so
great. That's where you know you're
having an impact. So, we sat down for
what turned out to be two long
conversations. I met you in 2010.
Was it nine or 10? It was nine or 10. It
was And what became clear is that the
answer to that question starts with what
drew Bannon and the Americans who would
form the MAGA movement to Trump in the
first place. Bossi had introduced me
when he was thinking about I guess
running for Obama and I was and Bannon
tells a story about the first time that
he met Trump back in 2010. This is a
really tempestuous time in American
politics. It's the aftermath of the 2008
financial crisis. It is the birth of the
Tea Party and the anger that many
Americans have toward Barack Obama and
what they see as his policies of bailing
out big banks and large corporate
interests while they're still on the
hook for mortgages they can't afford.
Right? At the time, Bannon was a former
finance guy turned documentary filmmaker
and conservative activist. Andrew
Breitbart was one of his best pals. He
was active in Tea Party circles. You
know, coming from finance and Goldman
Sachs, we really didn't know much about
Trump stuff. He was a media, you know,
he was in c things Goldman Sachs didn't
finance like casinos and things like
that. So, he wasn't I didn't know him
that, but I knew him as a huge
personality in New York. And Donald
Trump is flirting with getting involved
in presidential politics. And through a
friend, a longtime conservative activist
by the name of David Bosi, Bannon gets
invited to Trump Tower one afternoon to
help explain to Trump what it would be
like to run for political office in the
current climate. We sat there for 5
hours doing that presentation where Dave
Bossi was walking through how you win a
Republican nomination and I was so
impressed with um two things. Number
one, his knowledge of China at the time.
And I told Bosi on the way back. I said,
"Look, I can't have that conversation
with anybody in DC. Nobody understands
China at all." I said, "Trump has a
pretty good feel for it. Much more
sophisticated." The other was I was up
there as the Tea Party guy, right, about
crony capitalism, populism. And so
Bannon explains to Trump in this meeting
how America is going through an eruption
of populism. So I'm explaining populism,
you know, it's for the people and it's,
you know, this this is a blue collar and
it's a whole, you know, there's been
waves of populism before and you had
Buchanan and Ross Brown doing it. He's
not. And he goes, and Trump kind of
perks up at this point and says, well
that's what I am. Oh yeah. I go, that's
me, a populist. And he goes, a
popularist. I'm a populist. And I I go,
"No, no, populist." And he goes, "Yeah,
populist."
And I go, "No, no, no. It's populist."
And he goes, "Yeah, popularist." And so
he's kind of adding a syllable. Exactly.
And making up a word. And so finally, I
just drop it. Bossi's like kicking me on
the table. Shut the [__] up. The guy's
what he wants to be. Right. So
afterwards, I'm on the train and it's
bugging me. And I'm sitting there and I
turn to Bossi and I go,
you know, I think he might be right
because he comes at this with a bigger
media personality and he he's already
has an impression on the American
people's and he clearly knows how to
communicate to the average person. the
thing I saw in man. So after that first
meeting, Bannon begins to see Trump as
somebody with this almost predinatural
ability to understand public opinion and
to tell Americans what they want to
hear. Of course, Trump doesn't end up
running against Obama in 2012, but his
interest in politics doesn't go away.
And a couple of years later, he attends
this event in New Hampshire where a
number of Republican presidential
hopefuls are speaking about the future
of the country and the Republican party.
The rest of the speeches are all kind of
the same, right? Different ver, you
know, Rand Paul's a libertarian and Mike
Lee's a libertarian. You had Ted Cruz
and you had Nuke Gingri. So you had the
limited government conservatives, but it
all kind of sounded the same. Trump's
was totally different. He's actually
given this speech that's amazing kind of
off the top of his head and the audience
is leaning into it, right? And this is
one of the reasons we're following
Trump. The big one, the one you saying
though that people are leaning into uh
trade, China's ripping us off,
immigration, just stupid wars. Stupid
wars. The three pillars today, the
forever war, stupid wars. And you see
people nodding about it and leaning into
it very and at this event, Trump spoke
to what in Bannon's view ends up
becoming the three pillars of the MAGA
movement. And those are restricting free
trade, restricting immigration, and
ending forever wars. And on that third
pillar, forever wars, forever wars,
there's this particularly striking
moment at a debate in 2016 in South
Carolina where Trump is on stage with
all his opponents, including Jeb Bush,
who is former President George W. Bush's
younger brother. Obviously, the war in
Iraq was a big fat mistake. All right.
And Trump looks at Jeb Bush and says,
"They lied. They said weapons of mass
destruction. There were no weapons of
mass." All right. Go. Governor Bush. He
took us into Iraq under false pretenses,
looking for these weapons of mass
destruction that he knew didn't exist.
While Donald Trump was building a
reality TV show, my brother was building
a security apparatus to keep us safe.
And I'm proud of what he did.
And he's had the gall to go after World
Trade Center came down the go.
Hold on. Let me finish. Your brother
didn't keep us safe. That's not keeping
us. I think it's safe to say that until
that moment, people didn't say things
like that in American politics. people
did not and they certainly didn't do
that in a state like South Carolina, a
Republican stronghold that is very
militaryheavy.
The audience at the debate at the time
was kind of a ghast. People booed Trump
and the political pundits who were used
to conventional GOP politics where these
traditional conservative hawks dominated
foreign policy
said he's done. This is another example
when Trump is thumbming his nose at the
Republican voter. They'll see right
through this. But what those pundits
really missed was that Trump was
speaking directly to voters who really
wanted to hear a candidate take on a
Republican party whose policies were no
longer helping them. And Trump ends up
winning that primary in South Carolina
by a huge margin. This this was not
about politics. This was almost about
culture and a suppressed voice of
workingass people whose sons and
daughters had had to remember the agony
of people when you go to these veterans
see this. It's what did my son die for?
Why is why is my daughter not have a
leg? What
gets the most anger out of people I see
is when they talk about Iraq, it's the
broken lives, the broken families, and
what was the purpose. People forget
this, but Trump's promise to get us out
of what he called stupid wars was really
important to his ability to forge a bond
with workingass Americans. Americans who
felt like nothing was breaking their way
anymore, like they were getting screwed
left and right. They were bearing the
burden for all of these mistakes made
well well above their heads and pay
grade.
And Trump said,
I'm not going to do that. If I get
elected, we are not going to get into
these wars anymore. Right? and we tend
to focus most on immigration and trade.
But what you're saying, what Bannon is
saying is that it's the combination of
those two and Trump's deep suspicion of
war that ends up bringing him so much
workingass support. First in 2016, then
again in 2024.
They believe in his promise that he's
going to deliver on all three of those
issues. Yes, that's right. And Bannon
sees momentum building. He sees a
political alignment that Republicans
have long saw occurring before his very
eyes. Trump is winning over more black
and Hispanic voters. That we have
African-American men at 39% and they're
not going anywhere else if we don't turn
them off with invading another third
world country. In Star County, Texas
down in the Rio Grand is the most
Hispanic county in the country. We lost
it by 60 points to Hillary Clinton. 60.
We won it by 16 this time. That technic
plate shift of us trying to have a
realignment is before us if we deliver.
Right. And and in Bannon's mind, that
growth, the health of the coalition is
dependent on sticking to those three
pillars and on Trump doing what he said
he was going to do. But very early in
Trump's second term, Bannon is seeing
threats to the mega agenda everywhere,
including from people Trump brought
inside the tent himself, like Elon Musk.
And this is why I'm so anti- oligarch
and anti- Elon and all these guys. I
[__] hate them. Although they are
part of our coalition, but you and why
exactly? Because Musk has given Trump
hundreds of millions of dollars. It's
hard to see him as somebody who's trying
to undermine Trump. Why do I detest
these guys so much? Bannon would say
because they're not MAGA, they're not
conservatives. Elon Musk doesn't care
about the working class voter. He
doesn't care about Trump's campaign
promises to those people. He just cares
about his own share price and net worth.
Elon got the math earliest, right, about
how we were building a coalition, so he
jumped in after he bought Twitter. The
other guys became believers at 10 p.m.
Eastern Standard Time on the 4th of
November after we won Pennsylvania. all
of a sudden Zuckerberg and all these
guys, oh yeah, this MAGA thing's good.
And that is really a kind of a betrayal
in Bannon's mind of what Trump promised
to be for his voters, especially because
these technology companies have made no
secret about the fact that they're
creating something in artificial
intelligence that is going to not create
jobs for Americans, but eliminate them
altogether. Right. In Bannon's mind, it
sounds like if you're bringing in the
billionaires who are going to be
creating the trucks that need no drivers
and the factories that need no workers,
then they are using Trump and MAGASism
to hurt Trump and MAGA's most important
working-class constituency. All to
enrich themselves. But Bannon's battle
with these people he calls the oligarchs
or the Brolyarchs, Broligarchs
is part of a bigger fight that MAGA
loyalists feel like they're needing to
wage against powerful forces in business
and politics that are trying to push
Trump back into the realm of a more
traditional Republican president. Right?
Consider immigration. Okay? Yesterday, I
think one person came across the border,
right? He's essentially sealed the
border. And I'm very happy with the
deportations, although they have to pick
up one. Trump has delivered on a lot of
his promises. And Bannon would praise
Trump for that. I don't give a [__]
whether the upper middle class in
Beverly Hills in Bair have got to pay
actual American citizens to do their
lawn or, you know, clean their gutters.
And people say, "Oh, we'll never get
American citiz." Well, hey, if you have
to pay a decent wage in a competitive
market because you don't have millions
of illegal aliens that are prepared to
work for slave, look, we can't have a
country that's based upon servitude.
That's what this is. But he also pointed
to the big industries that rely on
undocumented labor and how they were
recently lobbying Trump to scale back
these deportations because it was
hurting their bottom line. And that blow
the most important blowback you're going
to face is big agriculture, the hotel
industry, the restaurant industry. And
you're going to get it even more going
forward. And that's what we if you don't
turn it around, we're going to lose
everything. And and Bannon sees it as
his role to intervene and say, "No, no,
no, no. Don't let this fail before we
really even get off the ground." Right.
Stiffen the spine of the president,
those around him. Exactly. And so Bannon
has been fighting on all these fronts.
When Israel comes out, bombs Iran,
Republicans start pushing for deeper US
involvement in the conflict. Trump makes
his decision to bomb Iran. But it seems
important to say that immediately after
the president made that decision, he
pushes for and secures a ceasefire. So
as of now, the US is not in a forever
war, not in the situation that Bannon
most feared, right? And that's no doubt
a relief to Bannon. But the fact that
this bombing even occurred, the fact
that Trump ordered American pilots into
enemy airspace and had them bomb these
nuclear sites, illustrates just how
entrenched, how influential the war
machine in Washington is. And how in
Bannon's view, the fact that we got so
close to a situation that really could
have escalated and still might. We don't
know that all that shows how easily a
major pillar of MAGA, this
non-interventionist pillar could be
toppled. The fact that the bombing
happened at all to him is proof, right,
of how deep the threat is and how
vulnerable the coalition really is.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Jeremy, given that Bannon and people
like Bannon are waging all these battles
to protect Trumpism, how does he think
about why the president would take the
risk of doing what he ultimately did in
Iran and what Bannon explicitly didn't
want him to do, which was bomb these
three nuclear sites? Why would Trump in
Bannon's mind take that risk and act
against this core tenant of his own
movement?
Because Bannon sees the same set of
powerful forces that have been arrayed
against Trump all along as pushing him
toward war with Iran. Forces like what?
In the case of Iran, chief among them
would be Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu. I have we've been lighting up
Netanyahu every day because now Bannon
would say is leading Trump into war by
exaggerating the threat of a nuclear
Iran. You started you started a war. You
started a conflict. Well, you don't have
the military capability to end it. You
have to depend upon us. And Bannon has
said, "Look, President Trump shouldn't
have to come in and play cleanup for the
Israelis. American forces shouldn't have
to finish the job that the Israeli
military couldn't finish itself.
However, I think more
it's not simply President Trump's
decisions. I think if you really look at
it and what I'm seeing and hearing from
people, it is the over-the-top
cheerleading and look like pushing by
Murdoch's Fox News that remind people
they're having PTSD
that reminds people of the worst
elements of the Iraq war. I mean,
literally, and beyond Netanyahu, you
have some of the more traditionally
hawkish elements in the Republican
establishment like Fox News. do not
listen to the voices on Fox News that I
think are beyond irresponsible. I think
you're playing it to the worst of the
neocon wheelhouse. Bannon sees echoes of
the Iraq war in this push for American
intervention in Iran. I mean, this is
all the hunt for let's go hunt for
yellow cake. Remember after they march
up country, they couldn't find weapons
of mass destruction. Why? They didn't
have weapons of mass destruction. And we
went on that whole charade and Fox was,
you know, the pompoms were out every
day. Remember, you have a variety of
commentators in right-wing Republican
circles appearing on the shows that
President Trump watches saying, "Don't
listen to your base here. You need to do
what's right for the country, for the
world." This is my point about the deep
state and about the apparatus, the
gravitational force of the Middle East,
but also institutionally the three most
powerful institutions are the CIA, the
Federal Reserve and Sencom. SenCom has a
massive gravitational force. What are
you also have the generals of the US
Central Command who in Bannon's eyes by
their very nature are just going to be
more hawkish about military action.
Right. The way Bannon sees it, it's the
old if you're a hammer, everything looks
like a nail bang away. We have changed
the electorate of the Republican party.
We have not changed the political class.
Bannon, Trump bombing Iran was the
triumph of the establishment. The old
order wins.
You can replace the president. you can
replace the cabinet and even tens of
thousands of federal workers in very
senior positions, which Trump has, which
Trump has, but there's still an element
that is going to stop Trump from fully
executing what he promised to deliver
on. And I think that's at the heart of
it for a lot of Trump supporters like
Bannon because they would say, "We won.
We won decisively. The American people
voted for this. They knew that Trump
wasn't going to get us into foreign
conflicts. And yet there are people in
Washington who are still somehow
persuading Trump that he should at least
somewhat reneg on one of those promises,
one of those pillar promises.
And it might look to outsiders
like MAGA is at the height of its power,
but to purists and ideologues and
intellectual godfathers like Bannon,
it's still a movement under constant
threat. Bannon feels this every day. But
he told me he's determined to keep the
movement intact by staying focused on
those three pillars of MAGA. The
progressives and the rhinos and all that
that think they're going to break apart
MAGA because of this. This is one of the
things that we're going to guarantee
does not happen. We're not going to
allow the MAGA movement will not
shatter. It is it's too valuable to this
country. It's too valuable to the
citizens of this country, particularly
in our expansion mode. Jeremy, I'm
hearing you talk about all the forces
that Bannon is fighting and sees as
pressuring Trump to do what he doesn't
want him to do. The deep state, the
commentators on Fox, the generals, Prime
Minister Netanyahu of Israel. And I'm
noticing who Bannon is not blaming, and
that's Trump himself, which is a little
odd because Trump made this decision
about Iran as only he can as
commander-in-chief.
And obviously the president's weighing a
lot, but why isn't Bannon ultimately
holding him responsible for the decision
that he doesn't like? To survive in
Trump world and to remain relevant in
his eyes, you have to be very sparing
with your criticism of his decisions,
very gentle.
So there's that Bannon recognizes.
I think there's also the fact that
Trump's voters have said, "We trust this
guy. We elected him because we have
faith in his judgment. And even though
it wouldn't have been Steve Bannon's
first choice to drop bombs on Iran, if
we're able to achieve this and
everything comes together and President
Trump just did the one military thing
that was glorious in its complexity and
that's it, that's I think the discipline
that we need. He's holding out the
possibility that maybe Trump did make
the right move here and this won't
escalate.
So, let's give him the benefit of the
doubt and see how this turns out. And
Bannon understands what a singular
political figure Trump is. That this
movement doesn't exist without him as
the charismatic leader. Listen, Jeremy,
he's not just the leader of the MAGA
movement. He created this movement. If
if Trump had not come along at the time
he came along coming down that escalator
10 years ago, we would be 20 or 30 years
behind. Now look how he's changed
everything politically against all odds
and against the established order. Both
the Republicans and the Democrats saying
he's a fool, he's an idiot, this never
going to happen. And now I think most
people realize we live in the age of
Trump. It is a seminal moment in
American politics defined by one man in
the movement that he helped build. And I
think we're at the very beginning of
this movement. And I think President
Trump's going to be with us a long time.
Bannon has described Trump to me before
as a guided missile. An interesting
metaphor given the subject here.
Exactly. Didn't use that metaphor in
this current context. But point being,
he's powerful, lethal, but he needs a
little direction from time to time.
As somebody who has a very clear set of
political beliefs, you know, an ideology
he can articulate. Bannon helps somebody
who is fairly un ideological like Trump
stay on script.
And even Trump, whose intuition for what
his voters want is quite remarkable, he
needs a reminder Bannon thinks. And that
reminder is even though he's president,
he is still in the minds of his most
loyal supporters. Trump, this
revolutionary political figure, and he
will face pressure time and time again,
as we're seeing now, pressure from his
generals, pressure from American allies
to abandon those revolutionary promises
he made. Right. And to do what the
establishment wants. That's right. But
he can't. And that's what people like
Bannon are there to say. Don't don't
forget how you got here.
Because if you do, then the whole
movement could unravel
and you would be just like another
ordinary Republican president.
[Music]
Thanks, Jeremy. Thank you, Michael.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Now, Republicans are about to make a
mistake on healthc care and betraying a
promise. It is inescapable that this
bill in its current form will betray the
very promise that Donald J. Trump made.
The fate of President Trump's giant
domestic policy bill has become
uncertain after two Republican senators,
including Tom Tillis of North Carolina
vowed to vote against it and half a
dozen other Republicans, remained
undecided.
In a fiery speech from the Senate floor,
Tillis said that he could not support
the bill because it risked kicking his
constituents off of Medicaid. So, what
do I tell 663,000
people in two years or three years when
President Trump breaks his promise by
pushing them off of Medicaid? Because
the Trump can only afford to have three
Republican senators oppose the
legislation, which would extend his 2017
tax cuts and pay for part of them by
cutting Medicaid and food benefits for
the poor. The president has set a
deadline of Friday for the bill to be
passed.
And the Trump administration has
determined that Harvard University
violated federal civil rights law by
failing to protect its Jewish and
Israeli students from harassment during
protests on campus over the war in Gaza.
That conclusion could increase pressure
on Harvard to reach a legal settlement
with Trump, who has already cut
Harvard's funding by billions of dollars
and sought to prevent international
students from attending the university.
Both sides are currently engaged in
negotiations over a potential
settlement.
Today's episode was produced by Caitlyn
O'Keefe, Austa Chhatravedy, and Stella
Tan. It was edited by Lisa Chow and
Lissa Anderson with help from Paige
Cowat. It was fact checked by Susan Lee,
contains original music by Marian Lozano
and Alicia Baube, and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley and Chris Wood.
Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and
by Lansberg of Wonderly. Special thanks
to Nick Pitman and Maddie Masiello.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]